Why Free and Open Machine Learning
==================================

Free and Open machine learning is comparable with open source software
(FOSS - Free and Open Source Software). But openness for machine
learning requires more than open source software alone. So we advocate
for using Free and Open machine learning.

The term open source software (OSS) means FOSS in this publication.
Freedom is important for free and open machine learning. \'Open source
software\' is sometimes also called "Free software", "libre software",
"Free/open source software (FOSS or F/OSS)", and "Free/Libre/Open Source
Software (FLOSS)". But the term "Free software" has been sometimes
misinterpreted as meaning "no cost", which is not the intended meaning.
It is all about Freedom, so a better term would have been to call it
Freedom Software. So \'Free\' open source software (FOSS) refers to
freedom, not price. This also applies for Free and Open Machine
Learning. Free refers to freedom.

The Freedom part makes a key difference in making sure machine learning
technology and all related aspects, secure freedom in a sustainable way.

FOSS machine learning is crucial for everyone. In our view machine
learning technology must be inclusive for all. This means that besides
using FOSS machine learning frameworks like Tensorflow all aspects must
be open and transparent. In this way machine learning becomes a real
open and inclusive technology that can be used for the advantage of
everyone. And everyone should be able to experiment, play and create a
new machine learning application. Without major obstacles in terms of
cost for technology usage or hardware required.

Free and Open machine learning means that everyone must be able to
develop, test, play and deploy machine learning based solutions. Large
investments should not be needed for using and applying machine
learning. So not only companies or people who can afford the enormous
investments needed in specialized GPU hardware benefit of machine
learning technology, but everyone can benefit. In this way everyone is
able to create meaningful applications to create a better world. Without
making enormous investments upfront.

FOSS machine learning involves more than FOSS software. The following
aspects are needed for real Free and Open Machine Learning:

-   FOSS Machine learning software (Free and Open Source software)
-   Open Data
-   Open Algorithms (Transparent machine learning algorithms)
-   Open Architectures
-   Open Science

These aspects are the core pillars of Free and Open Machine Learning.

![Pillars of FOSS Machine Learning](/images/foss-ml.png)

Open Source (FOSS)
------------------

Free and open-source software (FOSS) is software that can be classified
as both free software and open-source software. FOSS is an inclusive
term that covers both free software(FLOSS) and open-source
software(OSS).

Open Source is an approach for the design, development, and distribution
of new products & knowledge offering practical accessibility to its
source. Real open source solutions have a license that is approved by
the Free Software Foundation (FSF) (<https://www.fsf.org/>) or the Open
Source Initiative (OSI) foundation (<https://opensource.org/>). Open
source is all about collaboration and Freedom. Collaboration is key for
developing, applying and using machine learning functionality.

Software is free software if users have four essential freedoms:

-   The freedom to run the program as you wish, for any purpose.
-   The freedom to study how the program works, and change it so it does
    your computing as you wish. Access to the source code is a
    precondition for this.
-   The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help others.
-   The freedom to distribute copies of your modified versions to
    others. By doing this you can give the whole community a chance to
    benefit from your changes. Access to the source code is a
    precondition for this.

Open Source Software(FOSS) is the standard for machine learning
algorithms. However using open source software is still a new and
innovative concept for many companies. If you really want to benefit
from new machine learning software you must go for a solid FOSS machine
learning ecosystem. This makes you flexible, independent and you can
still use thousands of consultancy firms and (Cloud)hosting companies
that can help you, or are willing to provide hosting facilities.

A transition towards FOSS software can already be very hard and can be
disruptive for many companies. It takes the right mindset, attitude and
culture within a company. Applying machine learning for real business
cases is also complex and challenging. So taking advantage of machine
learning requires the right innovative mindset. Using machine learning
without using the benefits that come with the FOSS ecosystems of choice,
is like learning to swim without hitting the water. So hit the water as
soon as possible, after a while you see and use the benefits.

Machine learning applications are expensive to develop and to adopt.
This accounts for the development process itself but also good skilled
professional IT engineers and scientists are expensive. But it accounts
also for the needed infrastructure and other software resources needed
to develop meaningful applications for your business. This means that
currently big firms like Google, IBM, Microsoft, Facebook and Amazon are
at the front of the queue and smaller counterparts get left behind. But
most of the scientific knowledge of machine learning technology and a
lot of software is open and freely available. The core concepts of the
technique behind machine learning is crucial to known before starting
business projects. Machine learning for real use cases requires
adjustments and continuous tweaking, which is hard when you are using
inflexible black-box solutions.

FOSS developments in the machine learning field are absolutely no hobby
projects. Almost all major FOSS machine learning developments are backed
by small or large companies(e.g. Google, Microsoft, Facebook, Uber)
active in the deep learning ecosystem. Also many great FOSS machine
learning frameworks are backed by research groups of universities or
research communities organized by universities. Small machine learning
FOSS projects are often developed by PhD researchers and are supported
by a strong scientific foundation.

A focus on open source (FOSS) software for applying machine learning for
real is crucial. FOSS machine learning applications and frameworks have
the following benefits:

-   Create solutions software faster, better and with less friction. You
    can adjust what you want without limitations.
-   Lower cost for creating your first pilot project. Mind: Your first
    attempts will fail. And the faster your pilot projects fail, the
    better. This since applying the new machine learning capabilities
    requires a learning curve. Technical, but also for the organization
    and business side point of view.
-   Flexibility and changeability.
-   No vendor lock ins. Of course the machine learning cloud offerings
    of the major tech companies are great (Azure ML, IBM Watson, Amazon,
    Google etc). But playing around without any strings attached and
    limitations set for you gives you a head start.
-   Software is less dependent on a single company or software
    developer. Healthy FOSS projects have a large ecosystem of companies
    and independent contributors that maintain the code and preserve the
    quality.
-   Software is often more compatible with a wide range of other open
    systems. Most FOSS projects build upon open platforms. Also good ML
    frameworks want to be used and improved. So open and easy
    integration with other systems and tools is often built-in.
-   Open code is better science. The field of machine learning is still
    improving. Many researchers work on algorithms and improvements.
    Open code enables open science. Community input and feedback
    increases the quality. Also openness means that when papers of
    researchers are published everyone can inspect, use and improve the
    code that was developed. This openness enforces quality.

FOSS machine learning and machine learning in general is very popular.
See e.g. the diagram below which shows a view of the increase in google
searches for the recent decade. You should have very strong arguments,
also from a business perspective. This is because investments for real
world application have always have business risks. Choosing a commercial
black box solution often increases business risks and mitigation of
risks is harder. E.g. security and privacy risk mitigation is hard with
blackbox solutions.

![Popularity of Machine Learning](/images/popularity-of-ml.png)

All IT companies advertise with machine learning powered software
products nowadays. This also means that existing software that has been
sold for decades is now re-branded with the new machine learning buzz
words. Also terms like cognitive, artificial intelligence (AI) powered
and data driven are used to sell you old solutions using this new trend.
You can easily be fooled since massive marketing efforts (time, money,
material) are invested to sell old buggy solutions as new innovative
machine learning powered solutions. In reality black box solutions from
small or large vendors that seems good to be true for your use case, are
almost always based on fads. This is why you should be very suspicious
when using cloud based machine offerings that offers you instant new
business and customers. Make sure to do a fast and cheap hands on
innovation project first. Evaluate if and how your business use case can
really benefit from machine learning. If a new machine learning solution
looks too good to be true, be aware.

To use machine learning for real business applications you should use
and reuse good FOSS tools, frameworks and knowledge available. But you
should also take the quality aspects, technical and non-technical, that
comes with a machine learning framework choice into account.

When using machine learning FOSS solutions you can and should inspect
the working and evaluate all risks involved. By using a FOSS solution
you can ask every IT company or consultant with the right skills to
audit the application. Because in the end: When security, safety or
privacy of your customers is at risk, you are accountable.

Open data
---------

Free and Open machine learning does not only need FOSS software, but
also open data sets. Data is one of the most important aspects for
making machine learning work. Without data and open transparent insights
in the various quality aspects of the data, machine learning is not
open.

Without data machine learning is not possible. FOSS Machine learning
systems need open data to function. To function properly the following
is needed for FOSS machine learning:

-   Open data. Open data is data that can be freely used, re-used and
    redistributed by anyone.
-   Lots of data. Training machine learning models requires large
    amounts of data.
-   Data variety. For good training sets variety in data used is
    crucial. Else the bias problem turns up directly.
-   Data veracity. This means the truthfulness of data.
-   Trust in the outcome of applications powered by machine learning
    technology is only possible when the input data is fully available.

Open and reusable quality datasets are crucial for creating machine
learning driven applications. If you use a trained machine learning
algorithms, it is crucial that you have full insight in the origin of
all training data. How it was collected, filtered and used.

Creating a data set to test and develop machine learning algorithms is
hard and time consuming. Many current machine learning algorithms are
developed and verified by using open data sets. In
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_datasets_for_machine-learning_research>
a short overview can be found of various data sets used for scientific
machine learning research.

Free and open machine learning means that everyone should be able to
access and use data that is used to train machine learning applications.
So Google, Facebook and many other companies who donate a lot of machine
learning knowledge and frameworks in the open source domain rarely
release datasets that are used for their fantastic commercial machine
learning offerings. Not knowing details about datasets, especially for
live saving systems that are powered using machine learning technology,
means verification of claims is impossible. There are can also be large
privacy risks involved, since training machine learning algorithms
requires large datasets. Seldom do people give permission for using
their valuable data for developing applications that are not beneficial
for them. E.g. why should a government use your data in order to develop
an application that is not in your interest.

Data collection and data preparation is a major bottleneck in open
machine learning. As machine learning becomes more widely used, it is
important to acquire large amounts of open data. Especially for
state-of-the-art neural networks.

In the ideal FOSS machine learning world all non-personal information is
open and free for everyone to use, build on and share. So every
organisation, small or big, can create new machine learning
applications.

Preparing data to be used for training machine learning models is still
very time consuming and cost intensive. So most business machine
learning applications created make use of already trained models. E.g.
for speech or image recognition. But for your unique use cases: training
your own machine learning model is crucial.

Machine learning involves data, so you and your your business should act
based on leading data ethics principles. Some obvious data ethics
principles are:

-   Foresighted responsibility. So think ahead or imagining or
    anticipate what might happen in the future.
-   Use open data.
-   Be transparent.
-   Respect data privacy regulations and laws (e.g. EU GDPR)

Open Science and open algorithms
--------------------------------

Machine learning is a challenging science. Many researchers on
universities worldwide are working to develop new knowledge for solving
a range of complex problems.

Universities are funded by taxpayers. So in an ideal world everyone
should benefit from knowledge developed. Also almost all knowledge
developed is based on work developed earlier by others. This is how
science works. We build upon knowing of others to develop new knowledge
and insights.

Open science represents an approach to the scientific process based on
cooperative work and new ways of diffusing knowledge by using digital
technologies and new collaborative tools. This idea captures a systemic
change to the way science and research have been carried out for the
latest fifty years: shifting from the standard practices of publishing
research results in scientific publications towards sharing and using
all available knowledge at an earlier stage in the research process.

Developing machine learning knowledge using open science means that
publications, data, results, and software is accessible without borders
for everyone to learn and build upon. Key pillars of open science
important for open machine learning are:

-   Open Data:
-   Open source software
-   Open access

This so everyone can validate claims, inspect algorithms used and can
created and read machine learning experiments done without large upfront
costs. Transparency is needed for trust. This also accounts for machine
learning applications, algorithms and frameworks used.

For real open machine learning applications providing real transparency
in terms of explaining how results are created is a complex problem.
This is a direct result of how some type of machine learning algorithms
work. The current generation of machine learning systems offer
tremendous benefits, but their effectiveness is limited by the machine's
inability to explain its decisions and actions to users. The so called
\'explainable\' machine learning tools will be essential for users to
understand and trust machine learning applications.

Only when the basic principles for open science are followed, trust in
machine learning algorithms and software frameworks is possible.

The key of machine learning is smart algorithms. Algorithms that operate
as "black boxes" should never be trusted. Fighting against e.g. your
government is very difficult is no insight in the used algorithms. Open
algorithms developed in an open scientific environment are key for
trust.

FOSS machine learning with the use of open algorithms is needed to
prevent a "black box society". That is a society" in which key moments
of our lives are mediated by unknown, unseen, and arbitrary algorithms.
Open algorithms and algorithmic accountability is a way to stop this
pattern. An open algorithm makes it possible for anyone to analyse.
There is a freely available description and a FOSS reference
implementation.

Open architectures
------------------

Architecture is a minefield. Architecture is not by definition high
level and sometimes relevant details are of the utmost importance. It is
not strange that the added value of architecture and architects within
large companies and projects is under heavy pressure due to architecture
failures at large and the emergence of agile approaches to solve
business IT problems.

Architecture (business, information, application and technical) of
digital systems have an enormous impact on the products we use daily.
For developing and creating large complex systems you still need an
architecture. Developing a solid solution architecture and creating
solutions by working using an agile method should reinforces each other.

Open architectures should be concentrated around the following pillars:

-   Solutions should be created using FOSS system building blocks.
-   The created architecture blueprint is available for everyone. so use
    a friendly (creative commons) license.
-   The architecture is developed from an open process in which everyone
    participates to improve the architecture. E.g. also customers,
    business stakeholders other stakeholders that will be impacted by
    the architecture design in future. Borders that hinder participation
    should be removed.
-   The architecture is based around good usable standards that anyone
    can and may implement, use and improve. Unfortunate not all open
    standards are really open and usable.

![Open Architecture](/images/open-architecture.png)

Green ML
--------

Applying new technology brings new responsibilities. Computations power
needed for deep learning research have been doubling every few months.
Machine learning computations can have a very large carbon footprint.
This is a results of the way most algorithms are designed.

Most machine learning algorithms give only good results when large
amounts of data are used and an enormous number of calculations are
performed. Computers do use a lot of energy when calculations at large
are performed.

Ironically, deep learning was inspired by the human brain, which is
remarkably energy efficient. Moreover, the financial cost of the
computations can make it difficult for academics, students, and
researchers, in particular those from emerging economies, to engage in
deep learning research.

Green machine learning means is machine learning optimized to minimize
resource utilization and environmental impact. This can be done by data
center resource optimization, balancing training data requirements
versus accuracy, choosing less resource intensive models or in some
cases transfer learning versus new models.

Besides the cost factor, green machine learning is an important factor
for Free and Open machine learning since the benefits machine learning
can bring should not harm the environment of all living cells that have
no direct relationship with your machine learning application.

The Freedom to use the powerful machine learning technology should not
limit the freedom to live in good health of others. So green ML is a
difficult but important aspects for machine learning developments. So
chose algorithms that perform well without weeks of calculation on
datasets. Or make sure expensive and time consuming calculations can be
reused by others in an easy way.
